Port MASTG test 0044 (by @guardsquare) (#3049)
OWASP/owasp-mastg: tests-beta/android/MASVS-CODE/MASTG-TEST-0223.md

---
title: Stack Canaries not enabled
platform: android
id: MASTG-TEST-0223
type: [static]
weakness: MASWE-0116
---

## Overview

This test case checks if the shared libraries of the app are compiled without stack canaries and therefore lacking [stack smashing protection](../../../Document/0x04h-Testing-Code-Quality/#stack-smashing-protection), a common mitigation technique against buffer overflow attacks.

> In general all binaries should be tested, which includes both the main app executable as well as all libraries/dependencies. However, Android apps get compiled to Dalvik bytecode which is considered memory safe (at least for mitigating buffer overflows). Other frameworks such as Flutter will not compile using stack canaries because of the way their language, in this case Dart, mitigates buffer overflows. Therefore, on Android we will [focus on native libraries](../../../Document/0x05i-Testing-Code-Quality-and-Build-Settings/#binary-protection-mechanisms) since the main executables are considered safe.

Author: ```suggestion
In general all [native libraries/dependencies](../../../Document/0x05i-Testing-Code-Quality-and-Build-Settings/#binary-protection-mechanisms) should be tested. Exceptions exist for frameworks such as Flutter, which will not compile using stack canaries because of the way their language, in this case Dart, [mitigates buffer overflows](https://docs.flutter.dev/reference/security-false-positives#shared-objects-should-use-stack-canary-values).
```

Stack canaries must be enabled for Android native libraries but it might be difficult to fully determine it.

- NDK libraries should have it enabled since the compiler does it by default.

> - Other custom C/C++ libraries might not have it enabled.

Author: @cpholguera not sure what you mean with this? 

Isn't it more the case that it might be difficult for an app developer to enable this for 3rd party dependencies? But detecting it for all libraries should be easy?

---
title: Stack Canaries Not Enabled
platform: android
id: MASTG-TEST-0223
type: [static]
weakness: MASWE-0116
---

## Overview

This test case checks if the [native libraries](../../../Document/0x05i-Testing-Code-Quality-and-Build-Settings/#binary-protection-mechanisms) of the app are compiled without stack canaries and therefore lacking [stack smashing protection](../../../Document/0x04h-Testing-Code-Quality/#stack-smashing-protection), a common mitigation technique against buffer overflow attacks.

- NDK libraries should have stack canaries enabled since [the compiler does it by default](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/ndk/%2B/master/docs/BuildSystemMaintainers.md#additional-required-arguments).

> - Other custom C/C++ libraries might not have stack canaries enabled because they lack the necessary compiler flags (`-fstack-protector-strong`, or `-fstack-protector-all`) or the libraries were optimized out by the compiler. See the [Evaluation](#evaluation) section for more details.

Author: ```suggestion
- Other custom C/C++ libraries might not have stack canaries enabled because they lack the necessary compiler flags (`-fstack-protector-strong`, or `-fstack-protector-all`) or the canaries were optimized out by the compiler. See the [Evaluation](#evaluation) section for more details.
```

## Steps

1. Extract the app contents (@MASTG-TECH-0058).
2. Run @MASTG-TECH-0115 on each shared library and grep for "canary" or the corresponding keyword used by the selected tool.

## Observation

The output should show if stack canaries are enabled or disabled.

## Evaluation

The test case fails if stack canaries are disabled.

Developers need to ensure that the flags `-fstack-protector-strong`, or `-fstack-protector-all` are set in the compiler flags for all native libraries. This is especially important for custom C/C++ libraries that are not part of the NDK.

> When evaluating this please note that there are potential **expected false positives** and the test case should be considered as passed. But this would require a manual review of the original source code and the compilation flags used. The following examples cover some of the false positive cases that might be encountered:

Author: ```suggestion
When evaluating this please note that there are potential **expected false positives** for which the test case should be considered as passed. To be certain for these cases, they require manual review of the original source code and the compilation flags used. 

The following examples cover some of the false positive cases that might be encountered:
```

Not sure about the " for which the test case should be considered as passed". For the first example below, I agree, but for the second I think this is dangerous.

### Use of Memory Safe Languages

> The Flutter framework does not use stack canaries because of the way Dart mitigates buffer overflows.

Author: ```suggestion
The Flutter framework does not use stack canaries because of the way [Dart mitigates buffer overflows](https://docs.flutter.dev/reference/security-false-positives#shared-objects-should-use-stack-canary-values).
```

Reviewer: Thanks for searching for the reference!

### Compiler Optimizations

> Sometimes, due to the size of the library and the optimizations applied by the compiler, it might be possible that the library was originally compiled with stack canaries but they were optimized out. For example, this is the case for some [react native apps](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/issues/36870#issuecomment-1714007068). The are built with `-fstack-protector-strong` but when attempting to search for `stack_chk_fail` inside the `.so` files, it is not found.

Author: ```suggestion
Sometimes, due to the size of the library and the optimizations applied by the compiler, it might be possible that the library was originally compiled with stack canaries but they were optimized out. For example, this is the case for some [react native apps](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/issues/36870#issuecomment-1714007068). They are built with `-fstack-protector-strong` but when attempting to search for `stack_chk_fail` inside the `.so` files, it is not found.
```

- **Empty .so files**: Some .so files such as `libruntimeexecutor.so` or `libreact_render_debug.so` are effectively empty in release and therefore contain no symbols. Even if you were to attempt to build with `-fstack-protector-all`, you still won't be able to see the `stack_chk_fail` string as there are no method calls there.

> - **Lack of stack buffer calls**: Other files such as `libreact_utils.so`, `libreact_config.so`, and `libreact_debug.so` are not empty and contain method calls, but those methods don't contain stack buffer calls, so there are no stack_chk_fail strings inside them.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Lack of stack buffer calls**: Other files such as `libreact_utils.so`, `libreact_config.so`, and `libreact_debug.so` are not empty and contain method calls, but those methods don't contain stack buffer calls, so there are no `stack_chk_fail` strings inside them.
```

> The React Native developers in this case declare that they won't be adding `-fstack-protector-all` as, in their case, they consider that doing so will add a performance hit for no effective security gain.

Author: Is there a link for this?

Reviewer: Yes, it's linked above. We can repeat the link here if it helps.

https://github.com/facebook/react-native/issues/36870#issuecomment-1714007068

### Compiler Optimizations

Sometimes, due to the size of the library and the optimizations applied by the compiler, it might be possible that the library was originally compiled with stack canaries but they were optimized out. For example, this is the case for some [react native apps](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/issues/36870#issuecomment-1714007068). They are built with `-fstack-protector-strong` but when attempting to search for `stack_chk_fail` inside the `.so` files, it is not found.

- **Empty .so files**: Some .so files such as `libruntimeexecutor.so` or `libreact_render_debug.so` are effectively empty in release and therefore contain no symbols. Even if you were to attempt to build with `-fstack-protector-all`, you still won't be able to see the `stack_chk_fail` string as there are no method calls there.
- **Lack of stack buffer calls**: Other files such as `libreact_utils.so`, `libreact_config.so`, and `libreact_debug.so` are not empty and contain method calls, but those methods don't contain stack buffer calls, so there are no `stack_chk_fail` strings inside them.

> The React Native developers in this case declare that they won't be adding `-fstack-protector-all` as, in their case, they consider that doing so will add a performance hit for no effective security gain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The React Native developers in this case declare that they won't be adding `-fstack-protector-all` as, in their case, [they consider that doing so will add a performance hit for no effective security gain](https://github.com/OWASP/owasp-mastg/pull/3049#pullrequestreview-2420837259).
```
